We have seen so far how the theory of black body radiation fits the experimental evidence only if we
assume that energy is absorbed and emitted always, so to speak, pacard wise in the form of discrete
quanta.
However, BlackBerry radiation was only the first hint of this kind.
A lot of other experiments showed how nature seemed to exchange energy energy only in the form of quanta.
These experiments told us the same story in different ways from different perspectives, but always
with the same underlying plot, according to which energy and therefore also light can be conceived
of as made of particles.
One of the most important pieces of evidence of this type came from the so-called photoelectric effect
and from which Einstein coined the term photon for the light particle.
The photoelectric effect was already discovered in 1887 by the German physicist Heinrich Schatz.
He observed that sending light of sufficient high frequency onto a metal plate leads to the emission
of charged particles from the metal surface and which turned out to be electrons.
Heads, however, was not able to explain the true meaning and physical implications of this phenomenon,
the theoretical understanding and explanation came later in 1945 and which was developed by Albert Einstein
to understand what it is all about.
We will outline only a brief sketch here without going too much into the technical details, just to
give you an intuitive idea.
Now, imagine having a metal plate and you shine onto it a beam of light.
Suppose the light is in the far infrared spectrum, which means that any source of electromagnetic energy
emits light at the wavelength corresponding to the infrared spectrum.
Infrared, infrared wavelength so much below the red color, light, visible light, which means we
are using only a relatively low frequency or if you prefer, long wavelength electromagnetic wave.
This low frequency light beam would produce no effect on the metal plate, except, of course, that
it heats up or eventually melts it.
But no emission of charged particles.
The electrons will be observed at all as long as the light is under a specific threshold frequency or
if you again, if you prefer, or above a specific wavelength.
This, of course, independently from the intensity, the intensity of the beam, it will not happen
even for strong light intensities.
If you shine with strong and strong light intensities, nothing will happen.
Nevertheless.
If, however, the light goes beyond the frequency of the light, goes beyond a specific threshold frequency
or below a threshold wavelength, then suddenly a flux of electrons from the surface of the metal can
be detected.
And again, this, of course, independently from the intensity of the beam, and this happens also
for low intensity light.
What this shows is that light waves can extract the electrons, the so-called photon electrons from
the metal surface, which is made of an atomic metal lattice.
The fact that this occurs only for certain metal plates made it clear that the photoelectric effect
does not extract electrons directly from the atoms for electrons.
Are those electrons which were trapped inside the atomic lattice and are nevertheless free to move inside
it when an electric field is applied?
It is this property that, by the way, makes certain metals good conductors and allows to transport
electric energy through metal cables.
As everyone knows.
Therefore, this extraction process from the metal that this occurs only when the electrons acquire
a specific energy at a minimum extraction frequency.
No.
Zero, which, of course, is related to a minimum extraction wavelength in which we can describe as
Lumb, that zero equals C over zero, where of course, the C is the speed of light and not zero is
this minimum extraction frequency.
This graph, for example, illustrates the state of affairs, if we trace on the horizontal axis the
frequency of the incident incident light and on the vertical direction and the vertical axis, the kinetic
energy ekin of the outgoing four to electron, then one can see how only if the wavelength becomes small
enough or equivalently the frequency becomes high enough that is larger than zero.
Then will electrons begin to be kicked out from the surface and appear with some kinetic energy larger
than zero?
In case you don't know what the difference is between kinetic energy, potential energy, impulse momentum,
angular momentum and so on.
Please take a look to the brief lecture in the appendix.
If you have a clear understanding of the difference between kinetic and energy and momentum of a particle,
then of course you don't need it.
Which implies that part of the light energy that is incident on the metal surface must be employed to
extract the electrons first from the metal lattice.
This minimum energy is called the work function, and it with a Greek letter, letter fee, every metal
has a different work function, which means that every metal has a different threshold frequency, but
the effect remains qualitatively, qualitatively the same.
Once the electrons are extracted from the plate, then what remains of the energy of what was once light
goes into the electrons kinetic energy.
So in general, it turns out that the observed electrons kinetic energy must be the difference between
the energy contained in the incident light photons, which we know now have photon energy of eight times
new age, the Planck's constant nor the frequency of the wavelength associated to the photon and the
amount of work fee necessary to extract them from the metal.
In brief, you get a simple formula like this one where you have the kinetic energy equals age time,
snow minus fee.
Note that this is not a theoretical speculation, but an exclusively experimental fact.
For every light frequency with which one shines the metal plate, a specific kinetic energy of the electrons
is measured.
If we are above a specific frequency threshold.
Doing this for a large number of wavelengths or frequencies, why not Thain's is strictly linear dependency
between the lights incident energy and the emerging electrons kinetic energy out from the metal surface
like that shown here in the graph, while the threshold wavelength lambda zero of threshold frequency,
not zero, are determined by the type of metal one uses.
However, and this is an important point, the slope of the of the straight line of the graph, a linear
graph, is always the same for every metal and kind of substance one uses.
It is it the slope is a universal constant and namely that the Planck's constant, this is, in fact,
how Planck's constant could be measured.
Precisely.
What this determines is substantially the change in the work function only determines determines a parallel
transport of this straight line upwards or downwards.
But the slope of this.
Graff never changes because this is a universal constant that is given by nature.
So the point is also that increasing the intensity, which results in increasing the number of incidents
photons does not change the result either.
An increase of the light intensity, that is the photons flux does not at all alter the above graph.
It only changes the number of observed for two electrons.
If above threshold, of course, still, but not their kinetic energy.
The intensity does not play any role in the determination of the kinetic energy of the outgoing electrons,
a higher light intensity does not lead so therefore to a more energetic, ejected electrons, it only
determines its number.
This is a point this is somewhat unusual for a classical understanding, where we imagine light as a
wave, because the question at this point is why does light extract electrons from the metal only above
a threshold frequency, say, in the spectral domain of ultraviolet light or X-rays, but not below
it?
So, for example, in the visible human visible light domain, why can we not bombard, so to speak,
the metal surface with a higher intensity light of the same wavelength?
Just imagine many waves with large amplitude amplitude that overlap together to obtain the same result,
namely that of extracting the electrons from the metal surface, which means from the metal lattice.
How should we interpret this result?
Well, the generally accepted explanation, according to Einstein, is that as we have seen with the
black body radiation, we must conceive of light as made up of single particles, that is, photons
that carry a specific amount of energy and impulse and which are absorbed by the electrons one by one.
But this happens only if a single photon has sufficient energy to extract the electrons from its crystal
lattice and the metal.
The electron will not absorb two or more photons to overcome the energy barrier of the lattice it is
trapped in, it must wait for the photon that has all the necessary, necessary energy that will allow
it to be removed from the metal lattice.
And since it absorbs only one photon at a time, all of the electrons emerging from the plate will never
show up with energies of more than that of the single absorbed photon, even though a larger number
of photons, which means higher intensity of the light, can extract a larger number of electrons.
It was in 1985 that Einstein published his theory of the photoelectric effect alongside his historical
paper on special relativity.
For the explanation of the photoelectric effect and his so-called corpuscular little particle interpretation
of light, Einstein received his Nobel Prize.
So it was not for the theory of relativity, as it is sometimes wrongly believed, but it was the explanation
of the electric effect and which introduced the notion of the light particle, the so-called photon.